# What are adaptive listening experiences/adaptive podcasts?

---

There is a [PDF copy of this report](https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/publications/adaptive-podcasting-open-source) if you prefer to download and read it offline

---
 
Adaptive listening experiences are a new form of [flexible media](https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/object-based-media)  that examines the idea of hyper-personalisation in the audio space. They are audio experiences capable of changing on the fly, in response to external factors such as when, where, and how someone chooses to listen. They can reference multiple data sources and use the information found to conditionally deviate from the conventional narrative structure and/or presentation style of a piece of content in real time - without the listener having to interact in any way. In so doing, there is the potential to greatly enhance the listening experience and enjoyment of audiences, tailoring content specifically for the individual listener. 

The results of these changes can be incredibly subtle, to the point that they are almost imperceptible, or they can be clear and obvious to the listener, with both approaches offering creative opportunities for audio producers and value to audiences.   

Imagine if the content you were listening to knew that you were in a noisy space and, as a result, certain elements from within the mix were amplified to ensure you didn’t miss important moments. Or if you were listening to a piece via headphones additional audio stems would then be added to the play-out in order to deliver a richer and more immersive sound design than the default. Imagine if instead of receiving national news segments in your podcasts you received local news bulletins - with information important to you and your life based on your geographic location. This kind of future - where content is fine-tuned, customised and targeted, is within sight and with a small amount of further work, could become a feature of daily audio. Underpinning this revolution, is the change in how we go about consuming audio content today - namely via smartphones and other smart devices.

In order to explore this exciting evolution in the audio space, BBC R&D built the Adaptive Podcasting Player, an Android-only podcast-playing app and a SMIL schema to support the creation of these dynamic experiences.
   
## How smart devices are changing audio consumption.

The arrival of smart devices has changed audio world in two primary ways. The first is that it has made audio content more accessible and the consumption of content a more individual experience. Second, it has made listeners more individually distinguishable and less vague, 
thus amplifying the techniques audio creators already use to engage listeners.

For the vast majority of history, audio content and media entertainment in general, has been a communal affair, but today that is no longer the case. Originally, audiences would go to a place, a festival site, church, pub, theatre, cinema or dance hall etc to partake. Here, the environment, the staging and delivery were all determined and controlled by the producers of the event. Today however, we are largely dispersed and enjoy entertainment in situations we choose - with or without other people. Initially, this was with static TVs and radios in our homes, but now we do this on the move via smartphones. The difference between TVs, radios, and smart devices is that smart devices are more than media players. Smart devices are multifunctional and their utility relies on numerous sensors that are constantly recording data. TVs and radios are not filled with sensors. The devices and applications that we have come to rely on to help us to e.g. get from point A to point B, to know what the weather is like or to know what time of day it is rely on sensors and data contained in smart devices. Adaptive listening experiences reference this near-constant stream of data, using it to reflect the individual listener and their unique listening circumstances.

The second way in which smart devices have changed audio content is that they have unlocked a new way in which to capture and hold a listener’s attention. Early radio struggled to hold people’s attention due to the dispersed nature of audiences and the lack of visual cues that audiences could refer to. As a result, early audio producers had to develop new ways in which to exert influence over audiences. Refined over the last century, these techniques have crystallised into presenters and producers attempting to create a feeling of intimacy for listeners, a 1-1 connection between the listener and what is heard. They do this through techniques such as acknowledging the listener, presenters using informal speaking styles, deploying different styles of address, to name but a few. This makes content feel as if it has been crafted for each individual listener, but in reality, every listener receives the same programme. This illusion is so powerful that audience members often feel a deep bond to shows and presenters and feel as if production teams know them intimately. Adaptive listening experiences take this a step further by actually allowing for experiences to differ between audience members, a reality that would not be possible without the reference points that smartphones provide.

In this way, smart devices and smartphones have unlocked greater access and availability of audio content while also providing audio creators with an additional layer of understanding of audiences that makes individual listeners more discernible and reachable. 

For more information about the evolution of media formats and the relationship between audiences and the media they consume, please refer to [The Role Of The Audience In Media white paper](https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/publications/role-of-audience-in-media-how-culture-framing-narration-shape-way-stories-are-understood) by Michael Armstrong and Maxine Glancy which discusses the concepts and ideas touched upon here in much greater depth. 

## The inner workings of adaptive listening experiences/adaptive podcasts.
### How does adaptation take place?

As already mentioned, adaptive listening experiences are a form of flexible media. One of the central tenants of flexible media is that media assets remain dispersed at the point of distribution and that the relationship between assets can change (as achieved through associated metadata) in line with the needs and/or preferences of the end user. Adaptive listening experiences hold to this in that instead of all of the assets in a project being mixed into a single file - as is seen in conventional podcasts - the assets in adaptive experiences are still individually accessible at the point of play-out. It is this that enables podcasts of this kind to adapt. 

As the podcast is not a fixed entity, the behaviour and relationship between each asset in a project can be altered and a variety of rules/logic gates can be applied. Such conditional requirements can drastically alter the narrative structure and/or presentation of content and result in listeners receiving very different experiences. For example, a conditional restriction could be placed on an asset so that it only plays if the listener is in London. If the listener is not in London, then the audio file will not play or an alternative file that meets the listener’s context will be played instead.

The delivery of adaptive listening experiences requires audio producers to map out the different journeys that they wish to create, and the results can be simple or incredibly complex. By placing one condition or several on audio assets, the resultant experience can be incredibly personal to the listener or be broader and more universal.  Irrespective of where the project lands on the aforementioned spectrum, adaptive listening experiences rely on the audience. They are integral to the realisation of the podcast in a way that they simply are not in conventional experiences. 

Finally, it should be noted that adaptive podcasts do not record the listener’s personal data or share it with 3rd parties. It is only referenced at the point of play-out, thereby preserving the listener’s personal privacy. 

## Adaptive listening experiences and existing podcast formats.
### What have we learnt so far?

In trying to understand the potential of adaptive listening experiences, the first thing that we sought to do is to understand the mechanics and workings of existing podcast formats, how they interfaced with adaptive technologies and what could be gained by making audiences intrinsic to the experience.

In this initial exploration, we limited ourselves to designing and developing on-demand content. However in future, it might be possible to explore this concept while streaming content and referencing data sources external to the listener’s device. 

Through our research and experimentation, what quickly became apparent was that incorporating adaptive technologies into existing formats would present several challenges but also some interesting avenues for further exploration. In some cases, the enrichment from adaptive technologies would be limited and in others, there is a lot of potential.

## Existing Podcast Formats: Chat Style Shows
### Interview, panel interview, co-host and panel co-host podcasts 

A large percentage of audio content produced today uses the interview or panel interview format, where a host leads a discussion with one or more participants. Shows of this kind are extremely popular but offer limited scope for adaptation. This is mainly because the audience goes largely unacknowledged by those in the show. Listeners may receive a short introduction and a welcome by the host but are otherwise not directly addressed. The conversation flows between the host and guest(s) as if there is no one listening in and the audience are only onlookers to what is unfolding. 

Likewise, co-host shows or group co-host shows, particularly popular with younger audiences, are also affected by the fact that the audience is not integral to the structure. These shows feel like organic, meandering conversations between friends into which audiences have been invited - as if they are part of the gang. Sometimes they focus on a particular issue, at others they can feel like a stream of consciousness. These shows are inescapably personality-driven and often, audiences have formed para-social bonds with the panellist(s) through social media. Audiences are more often addressed and acknowledged in this style of show than in more formal interview/panel interview shows, but again, their presence does not substantively change the show.

Fundamentally, there is limited scope for adaptation or deviation with these styles of podcast, because the audience is largely irrelevant to the realisation of these experiences. Adaptive technologies could be applied to the narrative structure of shows in cases where the running order was formulaic or known in advance, but this would only really work for shows that could be clearly segmented. Adapting shows so that the listener only receives segments that align with their interests would be valuable but it could not be achieved with ease in all cases. The most easily employable, enriching function that adaptive technologies can provide in these cases is around accessibility and improving the listener’s experience by presenting them with a version that would be more suitable for their listening requirements. The more integral the audience is to the format, the greater the role conditional adaptation and deviation can play in the experience. 

## Existing Formats: Non-Fiction Audio
### Non-fiction One Story-One Series Podcasts & Separate Story podcasts

Non-fiction audio presents something of a challenge when viewed through the lens of adaptive listening experiences. This is because the principal objective of the storyteller working in this genre is to tell a specific story to the audience. 

Non-fiction audio projects are tightly authored experiences where all aspects of the project have been considered and this intentionality means that there is little motivation to deviate from the settled-upon structure and/or presentation. This holds true for One Story - One Series podcasts and for Separate Stories under larger brands. These kinds of experiences demand that the material essence of the podcast remain the same and so the value of adaptive technologies is largely limited to cosmetic presentation changes and accessibility.

That being said, there are some ways in which the technology could be used. It is not unusual that a lot of material is gathered when trying to develop these kinds of podcasts, and much of this does not make it into the final cut. There can be numerous reasons for this, for example, working to specific runtime requirements. Adaptive technologies could provide audiences with different durations based on their context, moving away from the duration prescribed by external forces. This approach is likely to find a large degree of acceptance from the listening community, in particular for fans of investigative journalism and true crime. This is because additional material that it was not possible to include in the podcast is often referenced with an invitation for the audience to go and seek it out via the web if they are so inclined. 

The above also holds true for Separate Story podcasts, but there is perhaps even greater scope for variation within these stand-alone anthologies. These single episode podcasts are usually produced by different production teams and lack a single overarching voice as found in One Story - One Series podcasts. This means that the distinctiveness of each episode can be enhanced. Certain teams may choose not to make their episode adaptive, while others may choose to. Both approaches would in theory, be acceptable in an anthology style format. 
   
Reflecting on our time examining Non-fiction audio, our biggest take away is how the desire for tightly-authored, universal experiences limit the potential application of adaptive technologies. Non-fiction audio necessitates sharing perceived truths to a group and as a result there is little opportunity or need for deviation in the narrative structure. In terms of the presentation, there is some scope for the use of adaptive technologies, but their capacity to enhance the audience’s experience is somewhat limited.

## Existing Podcast Formats: Fictional Storytelling
### Audio Dramas, Audio Fictions, Radio Plays & Theatre Of The Mind podcasts

Dramatic audio experiences are an interesting space to explore when viewed through the lens of adaptive listening experiences. This is because there are several elements to consider; the material essence of what occurs, the way in which the events are presented, any narrative devices employed, and the performance style. All of these play a role in fictional storytelling and can significantly change how the audience experiences a piece of content. Above all though, audio creators need to decide the degree to which they want their experience to be universal or individualised.

The simplest audio dramas behave like theatre shows in that the audience is separated from what is unfolding and is never directly addressed. The third person perspective that audiences have allows them to observe everything and to be privy to information some characters may not have. These kinds of fiction are suitable for adaptation, but they are limited by the degree to which storytellers want their stories to be universal as opposed to being individualised. 

If the desire is for the audience to have a shared experience, then the material essence of the fiction needs to remain the same for each listener. Storytellers can play around with superficial details within the drama, applying conditions to a selected number of passages of speech containing, for example, location details. Alternatively, they might look to alter the sound design of a scene from night to day or change the order in which scenes are presented due to the listener’s contextual data. If creating a shared experience is not the objective, then storytellers have free rein to tailor the experience, both in terms of material and presentation, to the individual listener with all the divergent outcomes that might entail. Audiences would get their own personalised version of the drama, which could be an interesting discussion point, but this comes at the expense of listeners feeling part of a collective and having an experience that is shared with others.  

One way in which this conflict could potentially be managed - allowing for both individualisation and shared experiences - is through the use of narrative devices. Some audio fictions employ a narrator, use a frame narrative or feature internal monologues. Techniques such as these can provide another point around which adaptation can take place. These techniques can be used to alter the way in which the fiction is presented and change how events are perceived by the listener. They give another layer beyond the narrative in which producers can play and where personalisation can be achieved without impacting the material essence of the story.  

In addition to how the narrative is perceived, narrative devices can also be used to shift the audience’s position in relation to the fiction. When narrative devices are used, they are often accompanied by a change in perspective. A third person narrative might be interspersed with an internal character monologue, for example, and this device uses a different style of address. The third person is dropped and the first person is used, bringing the audience closer to the events that are unfolding. By adopting a different style of address - the first person ‘I’ or the second person ‘You’ - the audience’s position in relation to the fiction is changed and different effects can be achieved. It is in these moments, where opportunities to deploy adaptive technologies present themselves, that the technology could be used to enhance the creative delivery of projects.

When reflecting on adaptive technologies in the dramatic/audio fiction space, the most striking factor is the need for audio creators to carefully consider the effects that they wish to create through the deployment of adaptive technologies and for creators to design experiences from the ground up in order to maximise the creative potential afforded. A strong grasp of story structure is a must, in addition to a clear understanding of the audience’s role, position and what they should take away from each scene. With this understanding, it is much easier to find effective ways and moments to deploy adaptive technologies so that the impact is meaningful and does not come across as gimmicky.

## Existing Formats: Guided Podcasts
### Health & Wellbeing, Wellness, Mediation, Sleep Assistance, Mindfulness podcasts
Guided podcasts are a relatively small sub-genre of podcasts primarily focused on the listener’s health, well-being and personal development. They are interesting in two regards, in particular when explored with adaptive technologies. Firstly, they are focused on their listeners having positive outcomes in the real world and place a greater importance on what is taken away from the experience rather than the experience itself. Secondly, the majority of these podcasts are timeless and can remain current to the individual many years after publication. They are not tethered to a specific time and place as other podcasts are and they are more readily compatible with repeated listening. 
 
Podcasts of this kind are extremely well-suited for adaptive technologies for several reasons. Guided podcasts place the listener at the centre of the experience, and they cannot be realised without them. Their primary objective is for the audience to come away with some kind of benefit which then manifests itself in the real world, and this cannot be achieved without the listener. As such, the listener has to be acknowledged and addressed by the host. 
 
Further to this, after a brief introduction, hosts try to remove themselves from the experience. They do this through the use of the second person style of address. This shifts the focus from the speaker to the subject, which is the audience.  
 
The second person style of address is incredibly powerful within the context of these kinds of experiences. It can be both singular and plural, meaning that it can simultaneously speak to the collective audience and to each individual audience member. The use of you, your and yours makes each listener perceive themselves as the protagonist of the experience and that they embody the subject of the podcast. The alignment of the delivery style and the subject of the podcast, which is every listener, means that irrespective of who they are, every listener can access the benefits that the podcast is trying to confer.
 
The immediacy and involvement that the second person style of address gives also has additional benefits. Every direction given or conveyed through active language, can be supported by detailed descriptions that tap into the five senses of the listener and which can be further supported by imaginative sound design. The varying scenarios presented can be vividly brought to life to create deeply engaging and evocative experiences. All of this is then further enhanced by the techniques that audio producers have refined over the years, resulting in an extremely effective and potent mechanism by which audiences are engaged. 
 
In summary, the features and objectives of guided podcasts make them incredibly well-suited for adaptive technologies. In trying to generate positive real-world outcomes, audio producers are already attempting to individualise listeners and listeners are seeking out these kinds of experiences to have their health, well-being and personal development needs met. Adaptive technologies could significantly enhance the personal response listeners have to this kind of content. By tailoring the experience further to the individual listener, folding in their specific needs and listening context, there is the opportunity to create something deeply meaningful and of value to listeners.

## Existing Formats: Music podcasts
### Music playlists

While not the central focus of our investigation, music podcasts and/or music-based experiences make for an interesting point of discussion when examined using adaptive technologies. In truth, there is no such thing as a ‘music podcast’ rather music podcasts are either chat style shows that discuss music or non-fiction audio podcasts discussing topics in the musical realm. The closest thing to a true music podcast would be an album or a curated playlist of songs. These did not fall into the scope of our investigation and so what we can discuss is limited. 

At a micro level, any music track is made up of several different audio stems and conditions could be applied to these stems so that their play-out behaviour changes according to a listener’s context. For example, drum tracks could be removed or enhanced due to the time of day someone listens or male vocals could be replaced by female vocals due to a listener’s location. In essence, adaptive technologies could be applied to dramatically change the feel and mood of a song. This could be of interest to audio producers and listeners from a mood management perspective, but it is debatable how valuable changes such as those outlined above might be. In additional, there would be considerable rights and licensing implications to consider. 

When viewed from a macro perspective, the ability to switch musical tracks in and out as desired or to stop them playing entirely might be of use to audio creators and it could be applied to all the genres already discussed. There is no one overarching rule as to how music should be approached due to the various roles music can play in a podcast, and its importance to the material essence of the audio content varies. It could be used to ground a podcast in a specific location or musical era that aligns with narrative content, or it could be used to change the tone and feel of an episode, for example. In truth, music works in service of the goals and intentions of the audio creators and the extent to which adaptive technologies can be valuably applied to it will vary depending on how integral it is to the podcast as a whole.

## What are the creative opportunities for Adaptive Podcasts?
### New formats and areas for further exploration

To wrap up, the final area we will discuss is further creative opportunities. As already outlined, the degree to which adaptive technologies can be of use when applied to existing podcast formats varies. In formats where the audience is not integral to the realisation of the experience, the potential of adaptive technologies is largely limited to presentational and cosmetic changes. 

Likewise, in projects where the objective is to tell a very specific factual narrative, mainly One Series - One Story podcasts, adaptive technologies may struggle to add value. From a narrative/story structure perspective, the story beats have been set out in such a way that the end result is the most compelling or most delightful experience that the audio producers can craft. Unless designed from the outset to meaningfully incorporate adaptive technologies, it can be challenging and somewhat limited. When thought through, opportunities do exist for interesting use cases. For example, adaptive technologies could be used to deliver a B narrative that runs parallel to the core experience. This B narrative could take the form of investigators or show producer notes that play out during the course of an episode or at the end. This, in theory, could be a compelling proposition if presented in the right way,  but an addition like this would need to be decided upon from the outset so that the delivery does not feel out of place or simply tacked on. 

There is greater scope for the application of adaptive technologies in audio fictions due to the variety of audio fictions that exist and the different ways in which the audience is positioned in relation to them. Different styles of audio fiction position the audience in different ways and what they get to observe and know, varies on a case-by-case basis. Likewise, the way the characters address the audience and each other differs. Different story structures, dramatic techniques and narrative devices all come into play. All of this together means that there are a number of different areas where adaptive technologies could be applied to add value and to enhance the audience experience. Above all, the degree to which the story is a shared experience or an individual one needs to be decided upon. For the best results, adaptive technologies need to be incorporated into the design process from the outset and careful consideration needs to be given if the adaptive technologies will be applied to the story structure, presentation and/or the frame within which the experience sits. 

Adaptive technologies can most easily be applied to guided podcasts and the added value achievable in podcasts of this kind are vast. By incorporating more of the listener into the experience, the podcast can better meet the listener’s needs by aligning itself to the context that the listener finds themselves in. Careful consideration needs to be given as to which reference points are used to deliver the adaptive experience, but the opportunity is clear.  Currently Adaptive Podcasts do not access health data, but with further development, additional data sources such as those from wearables could be combined with the data sources contained in a listener’s phone. This would unlock additional benefits for the listener at the expense of personal privacy. This would also be profound when considered through the lens of an evergreen podcast. With access to additional data sources, an adaptive podcast could be made even more responsive and align more closely to individual listener needs. 

In terms of creative opportunities and new formats, it is our belief that there are a vast array of opportunities for audio producers to make meaningful experiences that incorporate their listener’s lives and context into the experiences that they consume. This is particularly true for the more inventive podcast genres and formats - namely audio fictions, guided podcasts and, to an extent, non-fiction audio. 

The biggest thing that is required for this is a change of perspective. Rather than looking solely at the audio content, audio producers need to look at their podcasts holistically and even consider what a podcast is. The area which is most accessible for podcast producers to experiment with is the frame within which their audio content sits. The changes that can be applied to this can have a profound effect on how the audience receives a piece of content without the core narrative being affected. It could be an effective starting point for a producer interested in exploring adaptive technologies in more detail. From this point, it would then be easier to explore the narrative structure and presentation style and consider how adaptive technologies could be applied to the totality of the project being worked on. 

Equally, another area which is ripe for experimentation is the idea of an evergreen podcast. The majority of media consists of fixed artefacts, but adaptive projects can be designed to be more fluid which provides novel creative opportunities.  For example, a podcast could include a segment advertising a live recording taking place on 1 Jan 2023. This is redundant to any listener listening after that day, so a condition could be applied to that section of the podcast so that an alternative segment is played out. In so doing, a podcast could be made to evolve over time and this idea fundamentally changes the very notion of what a podcast is and what it can be. If the narrative, sound design and overall content of a podcast change each time a listener comes to the experience, then how does this change the perception of what a podcast is and the kind of experience a listener should expect? 

Experiences of this kind have not been seen since the days where audiences and performers inhabited the same space, where creators and performers would respond on the fly to audience feedback, thereby determining how performances should unfold. Adaptive listening experiences could be an example of digital co-creation and this would be an extremely exciting development for media.  

Experiences of this kind have not been seen since the days where audiences and performers inhabited the same space, where creators and performers would respond on the fly to audience feedback thereby determining how performances should unfold. Adaptive listening experience could be an example of digital co-creation and this would be an extremely exciting development for media.  
